---
order: 5
title: "self-portrait in a convex mirror: an auto-poiesis"
publication: Spittoon Monthly
publicationLink: https://spittooncollective.com/self-portrait-in-a-convex-mirror-an-auto-poiesis/
dateString: October 2021
---
**\*Author’s Note:** The title of this poem is taken from the poem by John Ashberry, “Self-Portrait in A Convex Mirror”. These poems were generated by a computer based off a corpus of around twenty-five poems, written over the course of the years 2016-2021. These poems cover a variety of reoccurring themes including: grief, assimilation, loss, memory, and language. These poems were run into a modified version of Open AI’s natural language processing program GPT-2 and lightly edited. The resulting highly experimental poems, taken as a whole, is a self-portrait of sorts, an auto-poiesis. It is a portrait of the author through the medium of a computer.*

<br><br>

**You Pay Homage**

<br><br>

<pre>
you pay       homage  practitioner                     to my name
                        you have paid       homage                 to your family
                        you have bestowed        * 牴      on                  one
                        of the Father                             of the Son
                        of the Holy Spirit

                                    of the Father                             of the Son
                                    of the Holy Ghost

                                    of the Father                             of the Son
                                    of the Holy Name

                                    of the Father                of the Son
                                    of the Holy Sacrament
</pre>

<br><br>

**I Sit On A Gallows**

<br><br>

<pre>
Embroiled,
you plead infirmities
                          in withdrawing out of debt
                          I sit
                                       on a gallows
                          square
                          watching morning's movements

                          obliterate
                          the poem
                          Aid to the forgotten
                          void theater

                          Diesel,
            watching empty areas
                          Frisian eyebrow, Sanskrit curls
                          pale, humped horses.
                          They wade into river
                          to learn more
                          see the fruit of firm gender
                          appear in public bearing wares
                          making
                          your presence taught
                          that sometimes,
                          watching its part,
                          watching flower.)
LEAVE.
</pre>

<br><br>

**The Ancestors of China**

<br><br>

<pre>
placed the seed of                     a plump being
            Grows ——
            pale anchored              like the rest of
            the earth’s
            floors
            amid cornflowers
            rising,
            watching the fields
            watching dawn
            watching the sky
            watching dawn
            watching from the East
                                      the Father
            Hearts arise
            Suddenly,
                         from the Father
            From the Father,
            Hearts come
                         From the Mother,
            Evening is about to begin
                         Light matures
            Suddenly,
            from the Father,
            Approach.
                         Our very being
                                adapted for living
                         technocephaly.
                         Our haphazard
                               structure [feuds]
                                             three
                                       momentarily
                                       closed-books
            can we even begin ?
                         could we possibly
                         could we?
                         could it ever occur
                         ever
                         ever     itself
                         null     collection
                         of little
                         momentarily               rippling ripples
                                            notes
                                     howling breath
                                     ale breathless
                                     contemplates               the Problem of Evil
            Beside                           you,                 a plump being
                        Grows ——
            pregnant
            of clear,                          sight
                        Grows,
                        we learn
                        how
                        makes sense
                        is broken

                        can
                        an adequate
                        fertile
                        small
                        void
                        I climb
                                    to the top
                                    of the Everglades

                        among the Father
                        among the Mother
                        of the Holy Spirit
</pre>

<br><br>

<br><br>

<pre>

</pre>

<br><br>

**Deva Eveland:** Could you describe in more detail how the GPT-2 program transformed the original writing?

<br><br>

**Thomas Wee:** GPT is a highly advanced piece of Natural Language Processing software developed by OpenAI that allows a computer to generate highly human-like strings of text. I was using GPT-2 for this project, although a newer more sophisticated version, GPT-3 has already been developed. The software is basically a “black box” unless you have an extensive background in computer science. Luckily, for people like me with only a basic grasp of computer science, people have built programs that let you manipulate GPT without having to work directly with its innards. With GPT, you can give it any body of text and it will “learn” the characteristics of the writing and eventually be able to mimic it with a high degree of accuracy. It obviously has a lot of limitations, which I discovered when attempting to have it write prose in another part of the project, but the results it can produce are, I think, already incredibly generative and interesting.

<br><br>

For this project, I trained the computer on about forty pages of poetry and had it generate several lines or stanzas at a time. The resulting “poems” are not merely modifications of the originals, but “original” creations by the computer. As a result, I hesitate to call these poems mere “transformations” of the originals. Although this is up for debate, I’d argue that these poems are original compositions by the computer inspired by the language, style, and syntax of my original poems.

<br><br>

**DE:** You say your experiment has resulted in a self-portrait. How is it more of a self-portrait than if the original poems had not been modified? What is it about the process that created such a result?

<br><br>

**TW:** As a poet, my style is autobiographical, so the poems that constituted the source material for the GPT-2 program are drawn heavily from my own lived experience. The poems themselves could be considered miniature self-portraits, slivers of reflected images of my life. Put through the computer, the result was a startling “refraction” of these images. It was honestly uncanny and a bit disturbing to read a computer that had been trained to mimic my writing. The experience was unique and very hard to describe.

<br><br>

The resulting poems generated by the computer, I think, feel more like spontaneous self-portraits than the original, more labored, intentionally composed poems. I guess I’d describe these computer-generated poems, in keeping with the theme, as being candid self-portraits. Since composing them, I find them to be more revealing and, interestingly enough, “authentic” than my original poems. Reading these poems is a bit like hearing your own voice on a recording, or seeing a photograph taken of the back of your head.

<br><br>

\*\**

<br><br>

**Critical Accompaniment:**

<br><br>

**A Mechanical Turk at the Poet’s Desk**

<br><br>

It is impossible to discuss Thomas Wee’s collection of AI-generated poems without roving into an area which is usually quite forbidden to the critic; that is, the act of creation itself. Poets are notoriously inarticulate about where and how inspiration strikes, and most, excepting the dubious crowd of poet-professors that Philip Larkin bemoaned, tend to respond to questions about their “process” with sighs of despair. But in the cyborg poems of Thomas Wee, process is the thing. The question becomes less “what and how does this mean?” and more “how did this come to mean anything at all?”

<br><br>

Wee himself offers something like an artist’s statement in an image prepended to the poems. Here is depicted a famous 18th century illusion, the Mechanical Turk, which was said to be a complex automaton capable of playing an almost perfect game of chess. In its time the Turk was enormously popular, and numbered among its opponents such illustrious figures as Napoleon Bonaparte and Benjamin Franklin. Eventually, however, its trick was revealed. Cleverly hidden inside the Turk was a small chess-master, and it was he who made the moves imputed to the automaton. The clockwork was all for show. It is perhaps telling that Wee’s diagram is an incorrect rendering of the Turk’s inner workings, probably devised by a would-be debunker. In reality, the human operator of the Turk never left his box.

<br><br>

So: where is man in the machine? Some observations about the technique of the poems are in order here.

<br><br>

1) The words chosen are often robust simples (“pregnant”, “gallows”, “void”), “literary” peculiarities (“Frisian”, “stethos”, “LECEANCE”), or common formulae, usually of religious connotation (“of the Father…”, “An out and out”, “or is this merely”).

<br><br>

2) Repetition figures prominently, often of set phrases with the noun replaced by a close synonym or antonym. Hence: “of the Father / of the Son / of the Holy \[Ghost/Name/Sacrament]”, or “watching the fields / watching dawn / watching the sky / watching dawn”. These repetitions tend to continue until an appropriately “unstable” phrase is reached, at which point they transition into other repetitions. *Viz.* “watching from the East” inaugurates “the Father” as a motif, etc. This procedure might be thought of as a transition between different “states” of repetition.

<br><br>

3) Transitions from line to line—or more precisely, between different states of repetition—do not maintain the tense or conjugation structures of the previous state, *viz.* “An out and out flirtation / of men / disguising” or “The Ancestors of China / placed the seed of a plump being / Grows—.” Within states of repetition structures are generally maintained.

<br><br>

4) Each new state of repetition takes into account the foregoing lines, and weighs word choice based on association with the material found there. The phrase “Evening is about to begin / Light matures” derives from the earlier usages of “dawn” “the sky” etc.

<br><br>

5) The poem must be arrested or it will never end.

<br><br>

The purpose of this list is not to step into the role of the Turk’s would-be debunker. Rather, it is to observe that there is something very brilliant and strange happening in these poems that has little or nothing to do with their apparent content. In fact, the more closely any given poem of Wee’s resembles a traditionally successful poem—as in the case of “The Catch of the Free Naked Reproductive Nation,” the most lucid, funny, and complete of the bunch—the more this brilliant quality is obscured.

<br><br>

What is really interesting in these poems is the way in which they function as a “self-portrait,” though not in the sense that Wee seems to take them. Some of Wee’s interests and qualities certainly come through unobstructed, and perhaps even enhanced by their lack of purposiveness, but a more fundamental portrait is being sketched beneath. That portrait is of the associative principle of man.

<br><br>

This is that notoriously unspeakable faculty that a poet calls upon when he sits down to work. In Wee’s poems, we see a kind of mimicry of that faculty. This mimicry is revealing precisely to the extent that it fails. Just as we see a perverse reflection of our appetites in the ape that has been taught to smoke, we see in Wee’s poems a kind of groping towards our own highest aspirations. The principles of their functioning outlined above hold true for many poems, even those written by human hands. That they can be elaborated clearly is a mark in their favor, and an indication of how much is left to be done. All poetry forms a map of the artist’s face. The day great poetry is written by a machine is the day we will have succeeded in forming a map of the artist himself.

<br><br>

*—Jack Calder*
